>>REGINA MEREDITH: In
my previous conversation
with Nick Pope, we
were told about events
that occurred in the
wee hours of Christmas
in 1980 near a military
installation in England.
These events were well-witnessed
and documented as we discussed.
What's not so well
known are the means
by which the military go to
see that this information never
sees the light of day.
Witnesses are
discredited and drugged.
Files go missing.
Dates are deliberately confused
to cloud any paper trail
and so forth.
Nick Pope, formally with the
British Ministry of Defense,
tells how these things
work in his book "Encounter
at Rendlesham Forest."
>>NICK POPE: Yes.
It's a fascinating story.
And I think part of the
story is the incident itself.
But certainly,
what happened next
is equally, if not to
some intents and purposes,
more interesting.
>>REGINA: I agree,
which is why I wanted
to do two shows on this because
I didn't want to diminish
the event and the
profundity of that.
But this is so important
because this is the stumbling
point when people say, well,
if these things happened,
how come we didn't
hear about it?
Certainly, the military
would have told us.
No.
The military wouldn't
necessarily tell us.
And you know this because
you were privy to it.
>>POPE: Yes.
There are a couple of
points worthy of making
right at the outset here.
Firstly, when we're dealing with
organizations like the United
States Air Force, the
British Ministry of Defense,
the DOD here in the US,
we are dealing inherently
secretive organizations.
Where, really, the default
position is to say nothing.
Now, a lot of people
might be saying, ah,
but what about the Freedom
of Information Act?
There are, how shall I
put it, ways around that.
I think there's a
couple of things.
Firstly, people
have been working
with the Freedom of Information
Act for many, many years now.
And I've seen this at
firsthand that sometimes you'll
be having a discussion,
and you'll say, oh,
I think I need to write
to so and so about that.
And then someone will
say, well, yes, you
could but don't forget, you'll
be creating a paper trail.
Maybe you should just pop by the
office and have a little chat.
So there's something like that.
But far more interestingly,
I think-- and this to me
gets to the heart of
questions like if there's
a cover up, where
does the secret lie?
Who is the custodian
of all this?
One of the things
that I've noticed
happening much more
in recent years
is the moving of certain very
sensitive and highly classified
projects out of government
and the military
and into the private sector.
Now, this has two--
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
Yes.
>>POPE: There's two
advantages with that.
Firstly, it takes
it outside the scope
of the Freedom of
Information Act.
>>REGINA: Public domain.
Yes.
>>POPE: Secondly, it makes
congressional scrutiny,
I think, a little
bit more difficult
if you're dealing
with the Armed Forces,
Armed Services Committee,
the Intelligence Committee,
whatever you're dealing with.
And I've seen this happen
on a range of subjects.
But for all the
skeptics that think
that UFOs is an unclassified
subject of no interest
to governments, I've seen it
happen to the UFO subject.
A classic example is
a British study code
named Project Condign,
very similar to Condon.
>>REGINA: Right.
When I was reading your book,
I though, did he misspell that?
What about the Condon Report?
Yes.
>>POPE: Well, Project
Condign was commissioned
by the Ministry of Defense's
super-secret defense
intelligence staff.
But it was actually undertaken
by a defense company,
a contractor.
And John Burroughs,
in recent years,
as one of the key witnesses to
the Rendlesham Forest incident,
has made it his
business to try and go
after some of these Project
Condign working papers.
And he's found that an awful
lot of them, of course,
reside in the private sector
and are therefore not eligible.
So he can make all the
FOI requests he like,
as can any number of
journalists or UFO researchers,
and they will get
a big fat zero.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And we'll go through,
and we're going
to kind of do a diagram of how
the information is obscured.
And I think it's important to
note for our American viewers
that the Freedom
of Information Act
wasn't fully implemented
in England until 2005.
It's relatively new.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
Now, this was Tony Blair's
flagship piece of legislation.
And when he was
elected in 1997, it
was one of his election
manifesto commitments.
It was enacted in 2000.
But as you quite rightly say,
it was not until January 1, 2005
that the act came fully into
force across all government
departments.
So many people, such
as myself, when I first
joined the Ministry
of Defense in 1985,
the concept of a Freedom
of Information Act
was just something that
the Americans have.
But we don't have
to bother with it.
So when I was
writing documents, I
was writing them
on the assumption
that they wouldn't
see the light of day
until long after I was retired
if, indeed, they ever did.
So the Freedom of
Information Act
was a real culture
change for a lot of us
in the British
government who had
been used to dealing without it.
And it took some
getting used to.
But in relation to something
like Rendlesham Forest,
which took place before we got
our Freedom of Information Act,
it's just added to the fact
that this was effectively
just buried.
>>REGINA: And even
considering the advantages
of the Freedom of
Information Act,
you have such heavily
redacted documents.
You can't read them anyway.
It's very different.
>>POPE: You have heavily
redacted documents.
You also have dozens
of exclusions covering
really general categories
in information:
defense, national security,
intelligence, information
passed to you in
confidence by an ally.
By the time you finish applying
those sorts of exemptions,
you end up sometimes
with documents
that are almost
entirely blacked out.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And so it really ends up
that the most effective way
to put the story
forward is as you've
done with this book: direct,
firsthand witnesses who
are willing to speak.
>>POPE: Yes.
That's what we wanted to do.
We just wanted to
get the witnesses
to put their story
into the public domain
and say to people not
this is what happened,
but this is what we experienced.
And when I say this is not
what happened, what I mean
is we are not forcing a
particular interpretation
down people's throat.
>>REGINA: This is
what we experienced.
>>POPE: Yes.
What I'm saying is this
is what we experienced.
You, the readers, now
make up your own mind.
And if some readers,
after weighing things up,
are a little more
skeptical and some
are a little the
other way, then fine.
It would be a very boring
world if everyone agreed.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Exactly.
OK, now, how did you end up as
a civilian with the Ministry
of Defense to begin
with, in the long sense?
And then, that short term
project, the UFO project,
in the middle of that?
>>POPE: Well, I
joined the Ministry
of Defense pretty much
straight out of college.
And my father had been a very
senior level in the ministry
himself as eventually the Deputy
Chief Scientific Adviser which,
despite the title
deputy, was in fact
the senior internal candidate.
Chief Scientific Adviser was
always a temporary appointment
from outside,
usually an academic.
So my father was
really the Ministry
of Defense's chief scientist.
And he--
>>REGINA: So you were steeped
with a passion for this
from an early age I would think?
>>POPE: Yes.
And he had certainly
suggested that I
would find a career in
the ministry interesting.
And indeed, I did.
And I did that for 21 years at
a number of different levels.
Obviously, every few years,
I was fortunate enough
to win a promotion.
And I worked with
different areas.
One job I had working
with the Navy.
One working with
the military police.
I got the chance to go to
some very interesting places
like Northern Ireland
and Kosovo and Iraq.
The UFO job I did
from 1991 to 1994.
So in a sense, it
was just one posting
amidst a very interesting
21-year career.
And I got that job
almost by chance.
I was working, during
the first Gulf War--
the Persian Gulf War,
in the Joint Operation
Center in the Air
Force Operations Room.
And I'd been seconded
into there because I
had a particularly high
security clearance.
And after that, the manager to
whom I was working most closely
said, I understand that
you're looking for a move.
I have a vacancy.
Do you want the job?
I said, what's the job?
And he smiled and said, UFOs.
I said, UFOs?
I said, OK, then.
I'll give it a go.
And nothing was ever
quite the same since.
>>REGINA: No.
I wouldn't think so.
And also just for
the viewers that
may not have seen the first
part of this conversation,
you're still under some of
the tenets that security oath.
There's certain specific
things that both US government
and British government
will not allow
you to speak about
regarding this incident.
That said, you've shared
a tremendous amount.
>>POPE: Yes.
The constraint I'm under is
the Official Secrets Act.
And that binds me for life.
Having said that, in areas where
the British government has,
itself, declassified
and released material--
and perhaps we can come
on to talk about this.
But something that
happened in recent years
is the Ministry of
Defense actually released
most of their
archive of UFO files.
Because they've
done that, I am now
more free to talk about that.
But yes, there are
very definite limits.
And I won't go beyond them.
I'm not a whistleblower.
I don't sit here
as a whistleblower.
I sit here as somebody
who was privileged enough
to sit in an
extraordinary position
and do this extraordinarily
eye-opening and mind-opening,
paradigm-changing job.
And I am at liberty
to share some of that.
>>REGINA: Well,
your dad was right.
It's been an
interesting career path.
Now let's go into some of
the protocols that are used.
We've already gone through, in
part one of this conversation,
what happened at the
Rendlesham Forest event.
So we have witnesses.
We have two men who were
exposed to radiation.
They have recordings that
were live recordings of what
was being witnessed at the time.
We have drawings of symbols.
We have code,
binary code that was
downloaded into one of them.
And these are the key people
that you have written the book
with, Burroughs and Penniston.
Now, let's forward the story.
The military know
something has happened.
Now it's time to
debrief the witnesses.
Let's talk about how that
begins, and then let's
talk about where it goes
really in ways that some might
consider not as ethical
as they could be.
>>POPE: Yes.
Well, first of all, a
number of the witnesses
from the first night, and that
includes John Burroughs and Jim
Penniston, were debriefed
a number of times
and asked to write
up statements.
Now, what's interesting about
this is, right from the outset,
we get things going--
I think off track
is the phrase that I would use.
So again, as I mentioned
briefly in the first part
of our conversation, but
I'll flesh it out now,
we had some of these witness
statements being typed up
and some being handwritten.
Some were dated.
Others were not.
Some witnesses,
looking back now,
say, well, something
was put in front of me,
but I didn't write it.
And I just signed it.
And some other witnesses have
said, that's not what I signed.
So we have a real mixture
and real confusion.
And in all the conversations
we can have about cover ups
and conspiracies, one is the
best tactics that you could
ever do is to confuse the
situation, to muddy the waters,
because what that leads
to is frustration.
And particularly, if any
mainstream journalists, say,
from The Times or The Post ever
wanted to have a look at this,
they look into
something like this,
and they can't really
make head or tails of it.
>>REGINA: They find
holes in the story.
>>POPE: Exactly.
And that, then, causes them to
call into question the veracity
of the witnesses themselves
because it's easy to say,
well you know, this
just doesn't add up.
And in one sense, of course it
doesn't, but that's the point.
That's the point.
>>REGINA: And it's
really simple,
bureaucratic measures
that allow this to happen.
>>POPE: Yes.
Very often, I mean,
none of the-- a lot
of the key documents in relation
to the Rendlesham Forest
incident are not hidden.
They are available.
For example, we
have the document
stating that the radiation
levels at the landing site
were assessed by the Defense
Intelligence staff in the UK
as being significantly
higher than background.
We have that document.
We've put in the book.
We have a document stating that
the UFO was tracked on radar.
We have the witness statements.
We have Colonel Halt's report
to the Ministry of Defense.
But there's an old
saying, the best place
to hide a book is in a library.
So what you do
is, is in a sense,
you throw many,
many more documents
into the public domain.
And I mentioned the
declassification and release
of the MOD's UFO files which
included files and documents
on Rendlesham Forest.
>>REGINA: So the real
ones are really buried.
>>POPE: Well, some
of them have--
the phrase that the
Ministry of Defense used
was that some intelligence
files on the Rendlesham Forest
incident have been, quote,
inadvertently destroyed,
unquote.
Now, when we were told this,
one of the things we said
was let's have a look at
the destruction slips.
I've kind of lived this life, so
I know how the game is played.
When you destroy
files or documents,
you can't just do it on a whim.
Somebody has to authorize that.
So I said let's have a look
at the destruction slips.
That will tell us who
destroyed the files and why.
Well, guess what?
>>REGINA: Or, indeed, if.
>>POPE: If.
Well, guess what?
The destruction slips had,
themselves, been destroyed.
You really--
>>REGINA: You got to love it.
>>POPE: You couldn't
make this up.
And yet, this sort of thing
happens a lot in relation
to the Rendlesham
Forest incident.
One of the interesting
pieces of information we had
was that some of the local
prisons had been put on alert
and warned to evacuate.
Why was this?
Did they need a
secure holding area
where people who had maybe
been exposed to something
could be kept
against their will?
Maybe some of the
military witnesses.
Maybe even the wider population.
Well, this never happened.
But we wanted to get to
the bottom of what alert
the prisons had been put on.
We found out that the governor's
journals had gone missing.
There was a Navy incident
involving a British warship
called HMS Manchester.
We knew there had being a UFO.
We knew it had been
tracked on military radar.
We knew that
hundreds of witnesses
had seen this thing because
it took place during a NATO
exercise involving the
British, the Norwegians,
number of other nations.
When Lord Hill-Norton, who's
a former Chief of the Defense
Staff, asked for
the ship's log, he
was told that it had
been blown overboard
by a freak gust of wind.
This sort of thing happens
an awful lot, specifically
with UFO records.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Absolutely.
Now, let's talk
about the process
of debriefing witnesses.
When it comes to using truth
serum, sodium pentothal, also
using hypnosis, how did
this play in at Rendlesham?
>>POPE: What we have
is an allegation
that a number of
the key witnesses
were aggressively debriefed.
And this took a number
of different forms.
First, just good old-fashioned
shouts and threats,
including the line,
"Bullets are cheap.
Yep.
They're a dime a dozen.
You guys, you better not
go shooting your mouths off
about this."
>>REGINA: Standard threats.
Sure.
>>POPE: But it's further alleged
that some of the key witnesses
were drugged, that they used
sodium pentothal sometimes
perhaps to bring out memories
so that the chain of command
could gain a better
understanding of what exactly
these people had encountered.
But sometimes perhaps to
then cloud the situation
and muddy the waters
and obscure the memories
of those witnesses.
>>REGINA: Well, that's
what I was wondering.
Because the mind is in a very
open and impressionable state
at that time, as with hypnosis.
It can as easily be
programmed as accessed.
>>POPE: Yes, indeed.
So we had this sodium pentothal.
But also, we had regression
hypnosis being used.
And again, that can
be used, of course,
to bring out hidden
memories, either memories
that have been
suppressed or repressed,
which is either an internal
self-protection mechanism
from the mind itself or an
external process that something
or someone has somehow
suppressed those memories.
And again, you would think,
well, this is highly unusual.
Who might it be?
What agency would have the
power and authority to do that?
As it happens, there is one.
It's AFOSI.
It's Air Force Office of
Special Investigations.
Now, I was speaking to someone
at fairly senior rank in the US
Army.
And he said, well,
my understanding
is that they stopped using drugs
and hypnosis in investigations
years and years ago.
In fact, I think it was
after the infamous MKUltra
situation, and the
Church Committee,
and the CIA using LSD,
et cetera, et cetera.
I found an Air Force Office of
Special Investigations manual
from the early '90s,
so long after this,
which said any personnel
wishing to use drugs
or hypnosis in the course
of an investigation
must seek authorization
from higher authority.
Well, now, if there was an
absolute prohibition on this,
it would say so.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>POPE: That's not what it said.
So clearly, as late
the early '90s,
AFOSI were, in
some circumstances,
using that technique.
So if they were using
it, could other agencies
have been using it, too?
>>REGINA: Well, it's a brilliant
way to discredit a witness.
>>POPE: Yes.
And of course, over the years,
in relation to the Rendlesham
Forest incident, some witnesses
have changed their stories.
Some new people have kind
of come out of the woodwork.
And again, people
have said, you know,
this is just people
jumping on the bandwagon.
This is people-- look at how
inconsistent their stories are.
Now, I have, in a
totally different job
in the Ministry of
Defense, my last posting
was actually in the Directorate
of Defense Security.
I worked very closely
with military police.
One thing they told me is, if
ever you come across a story
where all the accounts are
almost exactly the same,
beware.
That suggests there's
been collusion
between those witnesses.
Because different people
remember and perceive
things in different ways.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Very good point.
And one thing that is done
in a lot of these scenarios
is the witnesses are
almost immediately--
they might take a
statement from them.
They're immediately dispersed to
far corners and different bases
so they do not have a chance
to speak to one another.
>>POPE: And that's exactly
what happened here.
I was a little
skeptical about that.
And I asked some people who had
been posted there at the time.
And they said, you know, I've
never seen anything like it
in my Air Force career.
It's like normal posting
policy went out of the window.
It's like people midway
through their tour of duty
or even early into it
were suddenly posted back
to the continental United
States, out to Germany.
It's like the witnesses were
scattered to the four wind.
And of course, this is a
totally different world.
There's no internet or not in
the form that we know it now.
There's no Facebook.
There's no cellphones.
There's no social networking.
Once these people were
split up, they didn't really
find each other again
for years and years.
John Burroughs and
Jim Penniston did not
meet again until
just a few years ago.
And this is why it's almost as
if somebody, somewhere said,
you know, let's split
these witnesses up.
And that way, they'll
only-- they all
have just a piece of the puzzle.
>>REGINA: But I think that
might have been even standard
operating procedure
for that circumstance.
Because when I
interviewed Robert Salas,
he said the same
exact thing happened
at the event over the
nuclear silos in Montana
that he was on duty
and witness to.
And all of the witnesses
around, the guards outside,
right after that happened,
statements were taken.
And those people were all
dispersed to different bases
as well.
Same story exactly.
>>POPE: That's my understanding.
Yes.
And of course, it's easy, then,
for the skeptics or journalists
to say, oh, surely military
people get posted all the time.
And yes, they do.
But--
>>REGINA: Not the day
after an incident.
>>POPE: No.
And not such a large
number of them.
I mean, this is why I--
>>REGINA: Beyond coincidence.
>>POPE: Exactly.
This is why I
asked the question.
I said, look, I know people
get posted all the time.
But was this the
standard posting policy,
or was this something else?
And universally,
people came back
and said, no, this
was something else.
>>REGINA: Something else.
Another technique that's used
is to put incorrect dates
on witness reports and files
and so forth in the event
that people do go on
an investigative path
and try to uncover information.
If the witnesses all saying
it happen on a certain date,
but the file is basically
labeled from the day after
or the day before, it
ends up a dead end trail.
Right?
>>POPE: Yes.
Even Colonel Halt's
initial report
to the British
Ministry of Defense
had the wrong dates in it.
Now, again, was this
just a clerical error,
or was it something
more sinister?
It certainly did
have the advantage
that it stymied
the investigation.
It certainly thwarted
the efforts-- word
of this soon leaked out.
People inevitably were-- these
people lived, some of them,
off base in the local community.
Word pretty quickly got out into
the local bars and restaurants
that something had happened.
And even in these days before
the internet and things,
there were UFO and
paranormal investigators
who heard that something
had gone down here.
But because they had the wrong
dates, when people started,
in America, groups like
Citizens Against UFO Secrecy,
when they started using the
Freedom of Information Act,
everyone was looking
at the wrong dates.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>POPE: Even-- and this is
where it gets controversial.
And you mentioned this earlier.
The relationship between the
British and American government
themselves, don't
forget, it wasn't just
journalists and UFO
researchers that ended up
with the wrong dates, it
was the British government.
And when we, for example,
checked our Royal Air Force
radar tapes back in 1980 as
part of the MOD investigation,
we were checking
the wrong dates.
Now--
>>REGINA: Did that
tick them off?
>>POPE: It did.
But something else that happened
annoyed the British even more.
>>REGINA: What was that?
>>POPE: Well, this led almost
to a diplomatic incident.
And this is one of the
most intriguing parts
of the whole story.
Shortly after, and I'm talking
days after the Rendlesham
Forest incident, General
Gabriel flew in from Germany,
was briefed on
what had happened,
and flew back, taking with
him various items relating
to the case, including the
original tape recording
that Colonel Halt made.
But maybe some of the
other physical evidence.
Soil samples were taken.
Sap samples were taken from the
trees that had been irradiated.
Now, this is interesting
for a couple of reasons.
Firstly-- and this is a
very fundamental point.
Bear in mind, this is 1980.
The official position of
the United States government
is, hey, we don't
investigate UFOs anymore.
We terminated our
investigative program in 1969.
If that's true, why
is General Gabriel
flying in to be briefed
on this incident
and taking items back
to his headquarters?
And for any viewers
who are wondering
who General Gabriel
was, he was Commander
in Chief, United States
Air Force in Europe.
So here we have the US
government saying, on the one
hand, we don't
investigate UFOs anymore.
On the other hand, the senior
ranking US Air Force officer
in Europe flies in and
is briefed on this.
Something doesn't quite add up.
But here's where it caused
the row with the Brits.
There was a document.
And it's in the Ministry
of Defense file.
We reproduced it in the
appendix to "Encounter
in Rendlesham Forest."
And it says General
Gabriel visited,
took possession of this.
Well, you can imagine how
incandescent with fury
the Ministry of Defense were to
learn that not only had items
pertaining to an incident
that had occurred
on British soil been
removed from the country,
but that we hadn't
even been informed.
We found out retrospectively.
And if you read
that document, it
uses marvelously diplomatic
British understatement.
But it says, perhaps it
would be reasonable to ask
if we could have a
look at this, too.
I mean, I can't--
>>REGINA: It's embarrassingly
dismissive of the US military
and government to do this,
not just on British soil
but in general.
>>POPE: Yes.
It is.
And I, of course, had not
joined the Ministry of Defense
by that time.
I joined in '85.
So while I launched a cold case
review of Rendlesham in 1994,
I was, of course, not handling
the investigation back in 1980.
But if I had have been, I would
have almost certainly briefed
our Secretary of
State for Defense
to raise this at the
highest level with his US
opposite number.
I would've said this is
absolutely unconscionable.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Now, going on to
obscuration here,
we have US Air Force also
lied about the radar readings
in terms of the radiation.
Right?
>>POPE: Yes.
I want to be careful
about using the word lie.
>>REGINA: OK.
There was an inconsistency
in the readings.
Yes, of course.
>>POPE: There was a disconnect.
>>REGINA: Yes.
A disconnect.
>>POPE: They were economical
with the actuality.
>>REGINA: How British
to say it that way.
>>POPE: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>REGINA: This is a big deal
because Burroughs and Penniston
were both affected
by the radiation.
They were both in close
proximity to the radiation
from the craft,
touching the craft.
>>POPE: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so they
obscured this information.
And as you say, they were
economical with the facts.
>>POPE: Yes.
Jim touched the
side of this thing.
Certainly, there was
a flash of light.
The declassified
project Condign--
and when I say declassified,
the original level of this
was secret, UK eyes only.
So we're talking about fairly
high level, just one down
from top secret.
It basically came out and said
these guys with irradiated.
And yet, the US government
public position on this
is, well, nothing happened.
Or if something happened,
it was just lights.
And it was of no
defense interest.
>>REGINA: They downplayed
it even though there
were health issues
at stake here.
>>POPE: Yes.
And they still are.
John and Jim still
struggle to access
their military medical records.
John, I know, is actively
talking to his senator.
Senator Kyl has been involved.
Senator McCain
has been involved.
>>REGINA: Trying to
get their own files.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
And it turns out
that they are lodged
in the little-known
classified record
section of the Department for
Veterans Affairs, the sort
of place where Special Forces
soldiers' records usually
end up.
Well, John and Jim
weren't Special Forces.
So what is it about their
medical records that
means that they
can't be released?
And now, last year, Steve
Bassett organized something
called the Citizens
Hearing on Disclosure.
John and Jim were two
of the key witnesses.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>SPEAKER: Those who debunk
the whole UFO thing, what
do they do with this incident?
How do they explain it away?
It was real.
You saw it.
It was tracked on radar.
How do they explain it away?
>>JOHN BURROUGHS: We
believe the cover up
started within 24 hours
after the incident.
There was an individual sent
downtown and made contact
with some local, what they call,
reporters and investigators
that were involved in UFOs.
And it was spread
around that there
was some kind of alien
contact in the forest.
Also what went on after that
was there was a debunker that
came forward and tried
to explain it away
as either Colonel Halt, who
was a combat controller prior
to becoming a command officer,
that he was either fooled
by stars, planets, or
the local lighthouse.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>POPE: And the former
congressional representatives,
Republican, Democrat,
Libertarian,
who were sitting down on the
panel and asking the questions,
taking the testimony,
were so outraged by this
that they wrote a letter to the
President of the United States
and to the Secretary
of the Veterans Agency
asking that John and
Jim be given access
to their medical
records so that they
could get a proper diagnosis
and proper treatment.
>>REGINA: Probably the most well
known whistleblower in the case
is Larry Warren.
And I was first exposed to his
testimony at the disclosure--
original disclosure by
Steven Greer in Washington,
DC back in 2001.
Let's just take a
moment to hear what
Larry had to say about his
experience at Rendlesham.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LARRY WARREN: It was
so beyond anything.
And it's right in front of us.
I was at least 30 feet
away from it at one point.
Too close.
There was a life form
in association with it.
And so I can just cut to the
chase, which we perceived--
I perceived-- I
remember thinking--
and you've heard other
witnesses say this.
There's children.
What are these
children doing here?
And the mind starts scrambling.
But they were almost--
there was in the light.
There was bright light,
and there was movement.
And these things
had an upper body.
I clearly saw with--
and when I saw
an arm, what I perceived
to be arms, move,
I'm like-- you're in
another place at that point.
What I saw was on the
left-- the right side,
delta of this bizarre
object, machine.
This bright light moved out.
It was bluish gold.
It was about a foot
off the ground.
It split, and it was only
about four feet in height
from the ground up.
But it split away.
And three individual kind
of oblong cocoons of light
with this thing in it.
Three individual things inside.
I have a conscious memory,
whether it's real or not,
of looking into a very dark
void and having someone
to the side of me explaining
that there were tunnels
that connect the bases.
There were tunnels from
the bases to the North Sea.
These tunnels, that
were lit tunnels,
and I can still see them
in my mind, were massive.
And they entered.
They let out into the Orford
quay of the North Sea.
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>POPE: Well, I like Larry.
He's certainly the archetypal
colorful character.
I sat down and had
a beer with the guy.
His story is
difficult to reconcile
with what you hear from
John Burroughs, Jim
Penniston, Charles
Halt, Monroe Nevels.
And his talk of underground
cities and the commanding
officer maybe meeting,
even shaking hands
with some sort of entity.
Again, the problem is that
none of the other witnesses
saw that.
I got into trouble
with some people
in the UFO community for
this because Larry Warren
gets about three
pages in our book.
And someone said,
well, why is that.
I said, well, because our book
is not about Larry Warren.
And I said, with the
best will in the world,
John and Jim did not
see Larry out there.
And I can't kind of make
them kind of have seen them.
They didn't see him.
So we-- in effect,
the book is the story
of Rendlesham seen through
the eyes of the two witnesses
at the heart of this, John
Burroughs and Jim Penniston.
And if they didn't see Larry out
there, nothing can change that.
So-- but where I think
Larry is important is he,
without question,
was the first or one
of the first whistleblowers
to this case.
He got the story out.
Now, whether the
story that he tells
is something that
can be reconciled
with the other witnesses,
well, I think, as I've said,
that's very difficult.
But he, undoubtedly, is owed
a huge debt of gratitude
by everyone for really
being essential to getting
the story out.
But like I say, what
he claims, that's
not what John and Jim saw.
And that's not what
Colonel Halt saw.
And it's not what most of the
witnesses that I've interviewed
have seen or experienced.
>>REGINA: So with all of this
taken into consideration, how
do the governing agencies go
about releasing now-- now,
we've been talking
about the cover-up.
How do they go about releasing
information to the conspiracy
communities because this
is another conspiracy
within a conspiracy really.
>>POPE: Well, the
British government
has fairly recently completed,
for the most part, what
was a five-year program
to declassify and release
its entire archive of UFO
files, many of which I wrote.
Now, what's funny
about this, I think,
is-- bear in mind
something I think
I said in our
first conversation,
in our first interview, that
the British government always
told the UK's Parliament,
the media, and the public,
oh, they said, this is a subject
on which we've got very little
interest.
And we glance at
these reports to see
if they're of any
defense interest.
But we really don't put
much resources into this.
And the whole phenomenon is
of no defense significance.
Well, guess what?
When they released these files,
there were 55,000 documents.
Well, that's an awful lot for
a subject on which, quote,
they have very little interest.
>>REGINA: How is-- I
know there are also
special ways of infiltrating
into conspiracy communities
to put kind of
wacky disinformation
into their stream of
information to further discredit
the subject.
How does that work?
>>POPE: Well,
sometimes, it can be
as simple as using phrases
like little green men.
And very often, you'll
have, for example,
if a journalist tries to
do a serious piece on UFOs,
the contact will go
through the press office.
And the press officer
will slip in a phrase
like little green men or
the rather archaic term,
now, flying saucers.
And the whole story
will doubtless
come out looking and sounding--
>>REGINA: With a
different slant.
>>POPE: Yeah.
It will look and sound
a little bit silly.
And will refer to
people as-- now, I
don't know whether
this phrase translates
from British to American
English, but UFO spotters.
But it's a phrase that
sounds very nerd-ish.
And this is a tactic
that I think clearly
does go some way to
discredit the subject
and make it look ridiculous.
But you know, the
other tactic is simply
this best place to hide
a book is in a library.
And when the files
were released--
and I found myself, as the
public face of this, being
interviewed on the
BBC, being interviewed
all around the world about
this, but inevitably,
what happens with
55,000 documents
is that there are some
fascinating stories of UFOs
being seen by pilots and
by police officers, UFOs
being tracked on radar.
But, you know, what
inevitably happens
is the story of
the guy coming back
from the bar late at night kind
of finds its way to the front
somehow.
>>REGINA: Well, now, that's
what I was going to ask you.
Is this the way in which
intelligence communities
might use tabloids?
>>POPE: It might.
This is an area
where I, again, I
can't discuss
intelligence operations.
>>REGINA: It's been rumored
that they do plant stories
in tabloids to
discredit subjects.
>>POPE: I've certainly--
I'm aware of those rumors.
This is an area that I
can't really discuss.
But, I mean, again, for people
that want to research it,
there's a lot of
material out there.
And indeed, there are people,
such as the former MI5 officer
Annie Machon, who will testify
about the sorts of techniques
that the intelligence agencies,
certainly in the UK, will use.
But I'd better not
comment on that.
>>REGINA: I'd love to
interview her one day.
I'm going to see
if I can do that.
Are any of the witnesses,
then, actually plants,
where they're not actual
witnesses but plants,
so to speak to kind of, again,
further obscure the story
or take it down another path?
>>POPE: I don't know
that for a fact,
and I'd better not
speculate too much.
But one can't help
but wonder with some
of these characters
whether they just
haven't been given a
job of putting so much
ridiculous information out there
that actually it has the end
result of turning any
serious mainstream
journalist off this subject.
We would like, in
an ideal world,
to see a Woodward or a Bernstein
look at the UFO issue and look
at something like Rendlesham,
but when you get all this talk
of underground cities and people
shaking hands with aliens,
you can see why they don't.
>>REGINA: That's challenging
to retain one's credibility
and still become associated
with those stories.
I understand.
>>POPE: Indeed.
Again, we can speculate about
the extent to which this
is deliberate or just an
unintended but fortunate
consequence.
But just look, for example,
at Dennis Kucinich's
presidential campaign
and how that just
crashed and burned
after the media
got hold of the story
of the UFO sighting
at Shirley MacLaine's house.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>POPE: So this
subject is toxic as far
as credibility is concerned.
And there are very few
politicians who will grasp it.
And when they do,
they're generally
very careful to speak
about it in terms
of it being an open government,
freedom of information issue
as opposed to a I
think there might
be something to this issue.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And another phenomena that
you talked about in the book
is, OK, there are
pieces of information,
for example, even though they
have made a-- made it a purpose
to deny these events, then
they have other reports where
the military will
expressly state to pilots,
do not try to outmaneuver
these vehicles.
Again, obviously
referring to vehicles
that we have no
capability to match.
>>POPE: Yes.
Well, you're quoting directly
from the final report
of Project Condign there.
And it is marvelous.
It's an incredible document.
And of course, you'll
have seen, I'm sure,
that one of the
things that it does
is it doesn't use the phrase
UFO-- or not very often.
This is something
we did deliberately.
We swapped the terms, and
we coined the phrase UAP,
unidentified aerial phenomena.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>POPE: So we came up with
these phrases, as you say,
like no attempt should
be made to outmaneuver
a UAP during interception other
than to try to place the object
astern, if possible.
But one of the other
things in Project Condign
is it talks-- and
perhaps this gets
to the heart of UFO
or UAP, should I say,
secrecy is in one of the
rather obscure parts of it--
but again, it's out there.
You can find this quote.
It talks about the potential
applications of this.
And it uses the phrase "novel
military applications."
It goes on, specifically,
to talk about weaponization
and directed energy weapons.
And I think it's
technology acquisition that
gets to the heart of UFO
secrecy, both in relation
to Rendlesham Forest and,
arguably, in relation
to the phenomenon
more generally.
And you've got to ask
yourself, if any of this
turns out to be true--
and we had a phrase.
The believers only
have to be right once,
and it's the ultimate
game changer.
So if any of this
turns out to be true,
the nation or maybe
corporation that first acquires
this technology and
figures out how to use it
will be the preeminent
power on the face
of this planet
militarily, economically,
politically for the
foreseeable future.
High stakes I would argue.
And sufficiently high stakes
that you could understand
why even tried and
tested alliances
like the special relationship
between the US and the UK
seem to go out of the window
when we come to this subject.
It's like, it's everyone
for themselves on this one.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Because that's the big
game changer at least
in that sense of how
the world operates.
Is that perhaps why the
Ministry of Defense,
ultimately, even started
bringing psychics
in to read the situation?
>>POPE: Well, that was
a different program.
Certainly, the Ministry of
Defense's remote viewing
project, or rather a study to
see whether we should set up
a project, was actually ordered
very shortly after 9/11.
So again, one can have a
debate about whether it
was a direct result of that.
But again, this study
reports-- interestingly,
it's another example
of a study that
was commissioned by the
Defense Intelligence Staff
but undertaken by a
defense corporation
to have the effect
of taking a lot of it
outside of the scope of FOI.
>>REGINA: Very similar to SRI,
Stanford Research Institute,
British version of that.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
Now, I was very peripherally
involved in some discussions
about this back in the '90s.
I wasn't involved in
this particular study.
But I'm aware of it and
know a little bit about it.
I think it was a
classic example of what
we would call low
probability, high impact.
In other words,
maybe it won't work.
But if it does, the
consequences are
so immense that we need
to be in this game,
particularly if we think that
the Russians or others might
be.
>>REGINA: Or Americans are.
And they were.
>>POPE: Or Americans.
Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And they both were.
Yes.
>>POPE: And the paper
trail absolutely backs up
the fact, as you
say, that they were.
>>REGINA: Now,
something interesting
is going to be happening.
It will have
happened by the time
that this airs because
it's coming up very soon.
And this is a NASA event
with the Library of Congress
having to do with the
investigation of this issue.
In England, the Royal
Society has already
had two such meetings.
Can you tell us about the
nature of each of these?
And also might this actually be
the time where the military is
willing to finally start
trickling the information out
to the public at large?
Everybody's been saying,
when is disclosure happening?
Well, it appears, it is.
>>POPE: Yes.
The Royal Society held two
discussion meetings in 2010
in the UK.
And I was at both of them.
The first one was called The
Detection of Extraterrestrial
Life and the Consequences
for Science and Society.
The second one had an even
more provocative title.
It was Towards a Societal
Agenda on Extraterrestrial Life.
The NASA/Library of Congress
event, September 2014,
has the title Preparing
for Discovery.
All of these meetings
are essentially
multi-disciplinary gatherings
where-- basically it's
science community more than
government or military.
But it's scientists
coming together and saying
not just how is the search
for extraterrestrial life
going, but more to the point,
what happens when we find it.
Now, it's very much
dressed up and billed
as astrobiology, of course.
And people will talk about
microbial life on Mars
or Europa, or perhaps the SETI
program, radio astronomers
detecting a signal from
another civilization
like you see in the
sci-fi movie "Contact."
Exactly.
But there's no getting away from
the fact that this is a way of,
perhaps, getting this
issue out of the fringe
and into the mainstream.
>>REGINA: Big deal.
>>POPE: Number of
people have speculated
that these people
know something.
They know something's coming.
I don't know about that.
But I think it's certainly
a question of it's
wise to prepare for it.
What's really
interesting about this--
I mentioned that it
was multi-disciplinary.
It's not just, I suppose
you'd say, the hard sciences,
but it's the slightly
softer sciences, too.
So yes, there were
astrophysicists
and biochemists at
these sorts of meetings.
But there were psychologists,
anthropologists,
and theologians looking at this.
And for example, one
of the big questions
is what effect would discovery
of extraterrestrial life
have on people's
religious beliefs?
And there was a
huge row about that.
>>REGINA: We talked about
that at dinner last night.
You said that was one of the
more interesting and heated
parts of the meeting.
>>POPE: Yes.
Ted Peters, a theologian
who's looked at this,
said that so far as his
research is concerned,
people would be able to
easily incorporate this
into their worldviews.
And indeed, the
Catholic Church has
said that, doctrinally,
there would
be no problem with the existence
of extraterrestrial life
because human beings may place
no creative limits on God.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>POPE: Now, Ted
Peters said that.
Paul Davies, the physicist
and science commentator,
said that he very
much disputed that.
And he thought Christians would
have a huge problem with that
because the death and
resurrection of Christ
was so central to
Christian belief.
He said, what?
Are we supposed to
believe that this happened
on an almost infinite number of
worlds throughout the cosmos.
What's going on here?
So I think there's
a debate to be had.
But one of the other
characters at the Royal Society
meeting, one of the other
people who was discussed-- and I
think he chaired the
NASA/Library of Congress 2014
meeting.
He's going to chair that.
Is Steven Dick,
former NASA historian.
And he used the phrase
immortal thinking machines.
And I had to kind of kick
myself and think, wait a minute.
I'm at a scientific symposium
here, not a sci-fi convention.
And here we have
the phrase immortal
thinking machines being used.
And his thought
was that we might
be in a largely post-biological
universe where civilizations
had gone through the
biological phrase
and had evolved or self-modified
into cyborgs or even
into computer programs
or what have you.
The fact that the scientific
community is happy to sit down
and discuss this, where as a
few years ago this would've been
regarded not just as fringe
science but just as crazy
sci-fi--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Exactly.
>>POPE: --is a sign
of the changing times.
>>REGINA: Yes.
It is encouraging, even
though for those of us
you have been studying
it for decades,
it seems like it's dragging
out at a terribly slow pace.
It's, as the movie
"Contact" said--
we talked about this, too.
>>POPE: We did.
And there's the
classic line where
Ellie Arroway is keen
to move things on.
And her father, or rather--
>>REGINA: She's in this
other world speaking
with her father who's
actually an alien.
>>POPE: Yes.
And she's told,
"Small moves, Ellie.
Small moves."
And then, the line is,
"You've taken a step.
In a time, you'll take another."
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>POPE: But are
people impatient.
Of course, people talk about
disclosure and contact,
whatever phrase they use.
And they want it yesterday.
Well, maybe that's not
the way it will happen.
One of the interesting
things, I think,
people talk about the conflict
between science and religion.
That's something that's
gone back hundreds of years.
When you look at these
astrobiology symposia
where you actually have
theologians as part of them,
you've got to say that if
there is a conflict coming,
it's not going to be a conflict
between science and religion,
but between science
and government.
And here's what I think is
the interesting question.
What if the scientific
community has
what it thinks is absolute
proof positive of not just
extraterrestrial
life, but intelligent
extraterrestrial life.
What if they do, to
use the SETI analogy,
pick up a signal from
another civilization.
Would the government be
comfortable with that signal,
that message, being made public?
I'm not sure they would be.
Particularly-- and here's
the really intriguing piece
of speculation.
What if we picked
up an alien message
that we couldn't decipher?
Now, all sorts of
questions like this
were discussed, certainly, at
the Royal Society meetings.
One of the key things that
came out of the second meeting
was the question,
if we get a message
from another civilization,
should we reply?
If we do reply, who
should send that reply?
Who speaks, truly,
for planet Earth?
And what should that reply say?
And my goodness, if you think
that scientific meetings are
orderly and well
conducted, the level
of debate and acrimony at
times there was palpable.
There was talk of sages,
group of wise people
maybe speaking for
all the planet.
Someone, another scientist
shouted out from the back,
do the other seven billion
of us get a say in this?
>>REGINA: We can only
imagine the scenario.
>>POPE: Yes.
So I think all these symposia,
the Royal Society ones,
the NASA/Library of Congress
ones-- five years ago,
ten certainly, they
wouldn't have happened.
>>REGINA: Wouldn't
have happened.
No.
So that is encouraging.
>>POPE: Yes, it is.
>>REGINA: And on the
subject of messages, again,
as we spoke about in
the first conversation
on this, the decoding of the
message of the binary code
that was downloaded into
Jim Penniston, that's
available for people
to look at, correct?
>>POPE: Yes.
We reproduced all 16
pages of Jim's notebook
in the back of "Encounter
in Rendlesham Forest"
because we wanted people
to have the raw data.
Yes, there's a couple of
translations kicking around
on the internet that have
been put forward in TV shows.
But we wanted to say to people,
look, this has been suggested.
Maybe that's the answer.
But other people out there,
other people in the UFO
community, other people
in the esoteric community
will have their
own ideas and want
to do their own direct,
first person research.
And we'd like people to
have that opportunity.
So we thought give the
people the information.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Well, on that note,
we'll sign off.
And I just want
to thank you again
for doing such a credible
work that can really
be used as a tool for people
to reach out and bridge
these gaps between
skeptics and believers.
You've done a beautiful job.
And thank you,
again, for spending
a couple of hours
with me on this, Nick.
>>POPE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Again, the
title of the book
is "Encounter at
Rendlesham Forest."
And it's what I consider
to be the definitive work
on the structure of
encounter and cover up,
one you can share with
skeptical friends and family.
We will ultimately need
to be on the same page
one day as to what our cosmos
and our future hold for us.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.